README.md, before:

# jupik

A report of completion of a Stepik course Java from Zero to Junior Plus

## DESCRIPTION

There is a course *Java from Zero to Junior Plus* on the learning platform
[Stepik][1] (<https://stepik.org>). This course is declared to prepares
newcomers to be hired for a position of a Junior Plus Java Programmer and so
to start to receive a salary of a half hundred of thousands of Russian rubles
at least.

The completion of the course is verified by a certificate provided by
[Stepik][1]. Beside it it is valuable to confirm the completion with a text
that demonstrates materials studied, a so called *Portfelia*.

## DISCLAIMER

The text provided is typed by me to solve or to prepare to solve the issues of
the course *Java from Zero to Junior Plus* bought by me for 5,400 Russian
rubles on [Stepik][1]. But it is not intended to be a precise solution of the
only issues of the course or to be based on the only materials of the course.

## AUTHOR

  Boris Stankevich <microsoft-wanted@yandex.ru>.

## LICENSE

  This project can be used in accordance with rules and limitation of
  License [GPLv3+][2]: GNU GPL version 3 or later
  (<https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>).

  This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
  There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

[1]: <https://stepik.org/> "Stepik"
[2]: <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html> "GPLv3+"

Commit message:

add content to readme
Provide information on studied topics in the README file of the project.

Signed-off-by: Boris Stankevich <microsoft-wanted@yandex.ru>

README.md, after:

# jupik

A report of completion of a Stepik course Java from Zero to Junior Plus

## DESCRIPTION

There is a course *Java from Zero to Junior Plus* on the learning platform
[Stepik][1] (<https://stepik.org>). This course is declared to prepares
newcomers to be hired for a position of a Junior Plus Java Programmer and so
to start to receive a salary of a half hundred of thousands of Russian rubles
at least.

The completion of the course is verified by a certificate provided by
[Stepik][1]. Beside it it is valuable to confirm the completion with a text
that demonstrates materials studied, a so called *Portfelia*.

## CONTENT

There are topics of the course:

- [Intorduction](01-intro/INTRO.md)

- [Syntax](02-syntax/SYNTAX.md)

- [OOP](03-oop/OOP.md)

- [Advanced Level](04-advance/ADVANCE.md)

- [Second Level](05-level2/LEVEL2.md)

- [Collection Framwork](06-collections/COLLECTIONS.md)

## DISCLAIMER

The text provided is typed by me to solve or to prepare to solve the issues of
the course *Java from Zero to Junior Plus* bought by me for 5,400 Russian
rubles on [Stepik][1]. But it is not intended to be a precise solution of the
only issues of the course or to be based on the only materials of the course.

## AUTHOR

  Boris Stankevich <microsoft-wanted@yandex.ru>.

## LICENSE

  This project can be used in accordance with rules and limitation of
  License [GPLv3+][2]: GNU GPL version 3 or later
  (<https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>).

  This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
  There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

[1]: <https://stepik.org/> "Stepik"
[2]: <https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html> "GPLv3+"
