02-syntax/SYNTAX.md, before:

## 2 Syntax

### Variables

To define a variable its type MUST BE provided.

To fullfill the goal of the topic:

- Create a new class

- Define a variable

- Solve the following issue

    Let John has $100. Let Nick has five time more.

    How many dollars have John and Nick in total?

- Investigate the integral division

    When the dividend and the divisor are integral variables
    the quotient is an integral also. The remainder is lost.

    To get the remainder of the division the operator '%'
    could be used.

- Solve the following issue

    There is a variable that keeps a number of days, e.g. 10000.
    Represent this number as a number of years and months and days
    in the following condition:

    - If the variable keeps the number 365 the result MUST BE one year,
      zero mongth and zero day.

### Conditional operator

To fullfil the goal of the topic:

- Investigate the conditional operation if-else

    It allows to execute some logic iff a condition, i.e. a boolean expression
    is satisfied.

- Solve the following issue

    There is a variable that keeps the sum of dollars in your pocker. Write
    a logic that manages you what you MUST eat:

    - if there is more than ten dollars you are managed to eat a Pizza
    - if there is from six up to 10 dollars you are namaged to eat an Hamburher
    - otherwise you MUST BE managed to jre a Sandwich

### Integers

There are for integer types in Java:

- byte - one 8-bit byte
- short - two 8-bit bytes
- int - four 8-bit bytes
- long - eight 8-bit bytes

There are properties of numbers in Java:

- A variable of a longer type could be assigned with a shorter one

- A number literal, i.g. 10, is presented as an int

- There are few ways to increment a value of a variable

- To assign a variable of a shorter type a longer one MUST BE casted into
  a shorter type explicitly

- Solve the following issue

    There is a variable of the type int assigned with 1. There is a variable
    of the type byte. Assign the later with the value of the former.

Commit message:

[02-SYNTAX] calculate mean of floats
There are two kinds of fractional numbers in Java, float and double.
A numberic literal that contains a dot, i.g. 10.1, is presented as a
double. And it is presented as a float if suffixed with the latter f,
i.g. 10.1f.

To solve the following statistics issue:
- Create a few float variables that contains ages of members of a
  family
- Calculate the mean of values of this variables

Signed-off-by: Boris Stankevich <microsoft-wanted@yandex.ru>

02-syntax/SYNTAX.md, after:

## 2 Syntax

### Variables

To define a variable its type MUST BE provided.

To fullfill the goal of the topic:

- Create a new class

- Define a variable

- Solve the following issue

    Let John has $100. Let Nick has five time more.

    How many dollars have John and Nick in total?

- Investigate the integral division

    When the dividend and the divisor are integral variables
    the quotient is an integral also. The remainder is lost.

    To get the remainder of the division the operator '%'
    could be used.

- Solve the following issue

    There is a variable that keeps a number of days, e.g. 10000.
    Represent this number as a number of years and months and days
    in the following condition:

    - If the variable keeps the number 365 the result MUST BE one year,
      zero mongth and zero day.

### Conditional operator

To fullfil the goal of the topic:

- Investigate the conditional operation if-else

    It allows to execute some logic iff a condition, i.e. a boolean expression
    is satisfied.

- Solve the following issue

    There is a variable that keeps the sum of dollars in your pocker. Write
    a logic that manages you what you MUST eat:

    - if there is more than ten dollars you are managed to eat a Pizza
    - if there is from six up to 10 dollars you are namaged to eat an Hamburher
    - otherwise you MUST BE managed to jre a Sandwich

### Integers

There are for integer types in Java:

- byte - one 8-bit byte
- short - two 8-bit bytes
- int - four 8-bit bytes
- long - eight 8-bit bytes

There are properties of numbers in Java:

- A variable of a longer type could be assigned with a shorter one

- A number literal, i.g. 10, is presented as an int

- There are few ways to increment a value of a variable

- To assign a variable of a shorter type a longer one MUST BE casted into
  a shorter type explicitly

- Solve the following issue

    There is a variable of the type int assigned with 1. There is a variable
    of the type byte. Assign the former with the value of the later.

### Floats

There are two type of fractional numbers in Java:

- float - four bytes
- double - eight bytes

There are properties of floats in Java:

- A float literal, i.g. 10.1 is presented as a double

    To declare a float literal to be presented as a float the literal
    MUST BE suffixed with f, e.g. 10.1f.

- Solve the following issue

    Create a few varables that contains the age of some members of a family.
    Calculate the mean of values of this variables.
